### Mafia III ###

Mafia III is a strange, strange game. It seems fixated on making life easy for you in some ways, and then in others makes life absolutely painful. Every time you think you're too frustrated to continue, it gives you something great that makes you want to push through because you remember what you loved about it.

I lose a lot of gunfights in this game. It might not seem it, considering that I finished it just before starting this, but I assure you - the number of times I enter a situation and just get gunned down is absolutely staggering. Not only that, but you don't even checkpoint back in time. You wake up at your nearest safe house, less half your in-pocket cash, and if you're lucky you only have to drive about a kilometre back to the house full of bad men, spending more cash on the way to pick up new body armour and medical supplies and grenades. But! When you do spend that money, the game is so slick at helping you. You can just hold L1 and call a dude with a soft voice and a van full of guns and other bits and pieces. He drives right up to you, and you just buy out of that van with no fuss whatsoever. A little later in the game than you get him, you get access to a nice lady who will also drive up, and bank your in-pocket cash for you so you aren't risking it. Incredible! Yet I can't respawn just nearby most big enemy encounters.

The disconnect is in the moment-to-moment combat, as well. As you upgrade Lincoln's abilities you can get _worryingly_ accurate with a pistol held at arm's length, to the point that I gave up on sniper rifles only about eight hours in. They just don't feel like the way to play this game. Not to mention that when sniping, you are almost always vulnerable to someone quite nearby that you can't see. The times when you can hide out in a nearby elevated position, a la Far Cry 3, and drop people before moving in to sort the remainder, are very few. So usually you're under fire already by the time you get to use a very loud long gun to kill people about 50 metres away. Certainly you will be under fire immediately that first shot goes off. And at that point, you feel like you may be doing the thing a bit wrong. So after a short-lived relationship with the shotguns in the game, I picked up a silenced pistol and eventually a silenced submachine gun and got to work. These were better because at least in theory, you are not immediately noticed when you kill someone stealthily using Lincoln's stone-steady hand. But in fairness to them, the enemies are pretty observant and will probably notice a dead person before long. It's a touch annoying when they seem to know where I am without having seen me or seen the kill, sometimes. But I'll live with that. What's tough to live with is that when they roll right up to my hiding place, and I know I can't pop out without exposing myself to more fire, the non-aimed shooting just feels so so terrible. The cursor absolutely flies around the screen, and no matter how I feather the trigger most guns jitter it around madly. I can basically kill twenty or thirty dudes if I'm methodical and pop them carefully, but if one - one! - walks around the back of the table I'm hiding behind, or whatever, swaggering with shotgun or automatic weapon, it all goes to pieces and I'm lucky to escape having only used a single healing item. Which are not that plentiful or useful starting off!

And yet. And yet. I want to go back into each of these fights over and over until I beat them, because this game is very good indeed at making its enemies into hateable cannon fodder. They call out mean things, have some extremely grim conversations between themselves, and in many cases can be found actually in the act of abusing a citizen somehow. So why not shoot them? Learning the flow of headshots makes the stealthy (or at least, slighly at a distance) combat feel great, as gross as the sounds might be. But if you don't have the execution, ahem, in the moment, you can always just riddle them with bullets instead. If you do that, almost invariably they will lie there miserably, crying or just in shock at their own impending death. It's quite a strange moment. When you exert your power over them, they become immediately pathetic, despite all their bluster up to then.

Another absolutely great friendliness feature is Lincoln's utterly godlike 'intel view' where you can see absolutely every Bad Lad in your vicinity, outlined in red. Since it is not there unless you activate it, this doesn't become intrusive, but when you use it to know where to aim so you'll catch someone coming out from cover, it feels like they never had a chance anyway. There are yellow-outlined objectives or pickups, too, just so you don't miss them. The act of having the gunfight is a mere formality. Everyone is just waiting for the moment you run around mashing the PS4 touchpad to hoover up all those tasty piles of money, or whatever.

The police take more notice of you the richer the area you're in, which is a nice touch. They also respond quicker in the richer places. But police engagement is very specific. Crashing into other cars is fine, speeding is fine, breaking lights is fine. As soon as you hit a person (fair enough) or graze a police car they will be right on top of you and they have a very impressive headcount they can bring to bear. Not only this, but several missions in the game rely on the police being 'activated' against you as a plot/mechanical point. These are some of the most frustrating in-game moments, as your car (almost always you're in a car) becomes sluggish from shot-out tyres and surrounded by police cars. They struggle to actually shoot you in the car as long as you're moving at all, so you end up limping around the city at length trying to lose a snake of four or five police cars that's right on top of you. It really soured me on what is usually at least an exciting game mechanic.

Mafia III delivers its story in cutscenes spanning several eras - immediate, 'later', and modern-day. The immediate cutscenes are pretty standard crime story stuff, just following what happens to Lincoln as he makes his way through the grimy underworld of New Bordeaux, but well done and with some of my favourite voice actors I've heard in games so far. The 'later' cutscenes all take place in a room where a tribunal or similar is taking place, featuring your FBI-adjacent handler, John Donovan, testifying to a small group of bigwigs about Lincoln's rise to power. And then the modern-day cutscenes, obviously from a kind of documentary, feature the much-older priest, Father James, and a government agent named Maguire, both of whom have clearly never been able to forget Lincoln and that time, for their own reasons. I think it's probably been a good while since I enjoyed a highly-produced game's story like this. Maybe Titanfall 2, or some of the later beats in Call of Duty: Infinite Warfare (disclosure: I work for Activision and am credited in this game). Even those were not 'watched' stories, though. They were experienced, through a first-person viewpoint, and that made them feel different. This was like a good TV series or film I would want to watch again. Except hours and hours and hours longer than that. Perhaps in a year or two I'll go back through the cutscenes and relive this, but I feel like this moment, where I am right now in the immediate aftermath of it, is the most perfect time to enjoy that story for what it made me feel.

I find the game difficult to recommend without slapping caveats onto it - it's longer than it needs to be, with more going on between story beats than most people would enjoy. The disconnects between what it makes easy and what it makes hard can be jarring. It doesn't treat women particularly well in its periphery, but there are a decent number in the actual story. Ultimately, you play as a very cold-blooded killer who deliberately sets himself on the darkest possible path and sticks to it until the end. But if you think you can live with that, it's worth a try. There's a lot of game here. And if you can make it to the credits, I think it might just be worth it.
